Wagner blog post (#342)
openforcefield/openforcefield.org: content/community/news/science-updates/2021-05-19-wagner-blog-post.md

But if the new behavior isn’t obvious and there’s a lot of history on the problem, or the PR changes an implementation but the change can’t be reflected in tests, then that’s when things get difficult.
I’ll write about this below. 

Testing has been a great help to us.
The [MolSSI cookiecutter](https://github.com/MolSSI/cookiecutter-cms) deserves a ton of credit for providing clear instructions to scientific developers on how to set up and automate tests.
Of course, there is some maintenance burden associated with the tests -- If we change a behavior, several tests might begin failing, and then we have to spend time determining why the tests are failing, and whether the failures are appropriate given our original intentions, or whether they indicate a deeper problem.
In the worst cases, test failures caused by distant code changes reveal design flaws or undocumented assumptions in our models. 

There are still many places where our testing can be expanded, but over the last year, the development of the test suite has helped me sleep much better at night.

> The current code coverage of the OpenFF Toolkit 88%, which means that 88% of our lines of source code are executed by at least one test.

Reviewer: Might be a useful opportunity to 
* link to [OpenFF Toolkit](https://github.com/openforcefield/openff-toolkit) so our audience (which may be broader than OpenFF with this fantastic post!) will see what we've been building
* line to [code coverage](https://app.codecov.io/gh/openforcefield/openff-toolkit) for folks who may not have seen these reports before

And more importantly, our tests have become more sophisticated.

> Frequently we can discover and accommodate changes from new RDKit releases within hours. 

Reviewer: "API- or behavior-breaking changes"?

However, there isn’t a clear analogy to a plugin interface when we’re talking about the human-intensive process of maintaining a specification.
So, if the SMIRNOFF spec userbase grows, so too will the workload of tracking exploratory variants and handling requests for modification/extension.
But, as the saying goes, “that would be a good problem to have”.

Right now computational chemistry has some broadly-adopted specifications, but it also has cases like the PDB format, where the pressure to experiment is so strong that it tears the real-world use of the format from its spec.
I’ve been on both sides of this -- as a grad student I wrote code that used the PDB format outside its spec, and now as a developer I get another grey hair every time I see such non-spec PDB files in the wild.
I don’t know what actual engineers are trained to do in this situation, but I’m hopeful that we can craft OpenFF software and the SMIRNOFF spec to have a positive impact in this regard.

> I’m deeply appreciative to the people engaging in specification-defining efforts like [MMCIF/PDBx](https://mmcif.wwpdb.org/), and I hope that we can shape the OpenFF toolkit in a way that helps strong specifications gain ground in our field. 

Reviewer: Sadly, even MMCIF/PDBx don't uniquely specify the _chemistry_ of what's in the system!

Author: I'm pretty impressed by `components.cif`, actually. It seems to have equivalent info to an SDF. Though that won't be true of every MMCIF that users try to feed in. At least in those cases the file will _explicitly say_ that it doen't know bond orders + formal charges.

This isn’t just an abstract concern.
We don’t want to require that everyone who wants to use our force fields must ALSO use our code.
Decoupling this is the _whole point_ of publishing a specification!
So we should also have clear instructions on how to validate an implementation of the SMIRNOFF molecule parameterization process.

After a lot of thought about the question, the current best answer I can provide is **the specification for the process is our test cases**.
This is far from a perfect answer, but it’s a useful heuristic.
There may be a more theoretical-computer-science-formal-proof way of expressing this that I don’t know about, but I’m tempted to say “anything that passes our test cases is equal to- or greater than- the OpenFF Toolkit”.
Of course, this is a nonrigorous statement: Someone could use a fuzzer to create an executable of random 0s and 1s that happens to pass our test cases.
But outside of thought experiments, it’s a practical definition.

> To paraphrase a meeting a few weeks ago, between Jason Swails (the developer of ParmEd) and Matt Thompson (who’s developing a new System object for OpenFF)

Reviewer: Link to [ParmEd](https://parmed.github.io/ParmEd/html/index.html)?

| MT: “How could we tell if my System object could be a replacement for ParmEd?” 
 
| JS: “I’m not sure, but you’re probably there if you can pass all the ParmEd test cases”

With this in mind, I’m starting to think about how we could publish a “reference” dataset, containing a bunch of input OFFXML and SDF files, and the expected parameters or energies that should come out for each of them.
I’d originally heard this idea at the [November 2019 MolSSI interoperability workshop](https://molssi.org/2019/07/29/molssi-workshop-molecular-dynamics-software-interoperability/), and it’s stuck with me.
This would be inexact in some areas -- we couldn’t expect to get identical partial charges from different AM1BCC implementations -- but it would at least be a starting point for iteration for parallel developers to have some way to validate their implementations. 

> ## “The implementation is the specification”

Reviewer: Unfortunately, this is literally the direction that [InChI](https://iupac.org/who-we-are/divisions/division-details/inchi/) has gone---a single programmer maintains a single codebase (potentially [inscrutable to others](https://github.com/metamolecular/inchi/blob/master/INCHI_BASE/src/ichi_bns.c#L467-L668)) which defines InChI. One might easily anticipate the problems that might lie down the road!

This is the natural way of things -- premature specification of data is analogous to premature optimization of code.
It will make you spend your effort _now_, and then restrict the flexibility of your program _later_.
OpenFF is on both sides of this, with new research rapidly iterating on formats as data is passed between scripts, file systems, and existing tools (as it must), but more mature software requiring strict adherence to input format specifications in order to do the science that the user wants.
We’re still working on figuring out when the metamorphosis from “research code” to “production code” happens.
Based on our experience so far, it begins when a project starts using one of the core toolkits to do some part of its workflow, matures when the work is published, and ends [when the functionality is merged into one of the core packages](https://github.com/openforcefield/cmiles/commit/79d4710618dd32cf7050acb2bf5a65fdd68778e6). 

There’s also a more immediate reason for us to respect and promote specifications.
OpenFF follows a [dependency-heavy development model](https://github.com/conda-forge/openff-toolkit-feedstock/blob/master/recipe/meta.yaml).

> Anyone who has installed our conda package knows that we stand on top of a “jenga tower” of dependencies.

Reviewer: "Shoulders of Giants"!

If we hope to establish a culture among our neighbors where we want that stability from upstream, it is by extension our responsibility to be good neighbors to everyone downstream.
In the PR review priorities above, you’ll notice that “don’t be reverse-incompatible” is second only to “don’t violate a spec”.

Advocating for specifications is an uphill battle in any organization.
We are very fortunate to have our leadership, especially John Chodera, advocating for practices like specification in our work.
Last time I checked, testing and specification weren’t the shortest path between personnel-time and funding, but they do greatly improve the odds that our work will have the long-term impact that we want it to.

(And as an aside, rebuilding this jenga tower of dependencies after it’s fallen over several times has also made me genuinely appreciate the “if you’ve got a C compiler, then you can run the program” development model of existing comp chem packages.
As the toolkit’s behavior stabilizes I would like to start cutting down on the number and complexity of our dependencies, to the degree that we really can.)

> For those interested in more information about the day-to-day of how OpenFF operates, we’ve opened up our [Infrastructure space on Confluence](https://openforcefield.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/IN/overview). It’s a bit messy, and one team member described it as “a DDOS of information”, but please feel free to take a look!

Reviewer: Perhaps a parting thought or two, looking forward to the year ahead?

But if the new behavior isn’t obvious and there’s a lot of history on the problem, or the PR changes an implementation but the change can’t be reflected in tests, then that’s when things get difficult.
I’ll write about this below. 

Testing has been a great help to us.
The [MolSSI cookiecutter](https://github.com/MolSSI/cookiecutter-cms) deserves a ton of credit for providing clear instructions to scientific developers on how to set up and automate tests.
Of course, there is some maintenance burden associated with the tests -- If we change a behavior, several tests might begin failing, and then we have to spend time determining why the tests are failing, and whether the failures are appropriate given our original intentions, or whether they indicate a deeper problem.
In the worst cases, test failures caused by distant code changes reveal design flaws or undocumented assumptions in our models. 

There are still many places where our testing can be expanded, but over the last year, the development of the test suite has helped me sleep much better at night.

> Our current code coverage is 88%, which means that 88% of our lines of source code are executed by at least one test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current code coverage of the OpenFF Toolkit 88%, which means that 88% of our lines of source code are executed by at least one test.
```

One small clarification, since I have no idea what the coverage for **all** of our code is and that's how this read at first

Author: Good call. Thanks!
